
= Regular Expression Construction.

Complex regular expressions are hard to construct and even harder to
read.  The Re library allows users to construct complex regular
expressions from simpler expressions.  For example, consider the
following regular expression that will parse dates:

   /\A((?:19|20)[0-9]{2})[\- \/.](0[1-9]|1[012])[\- \/.](0[1-9]|[12][0-9]|3[01])\z/

Using the Re library, That regular expression can be built
incrementaly from smaller, easier to understand expressions.
Perhaps something like this:

  require 're'

  include Re

  delim                = re.any("- /.")
  century_prefix       = re("19") | re("20")
  under_ten            = re("0") + re.any("1-9")
  ten_to_twelve        = re("1") + re.any("012")
  ten_and_under_thirty = re.any("12") + re.any("0-9")
  thirties             = re("3") + re.any("01")
         
  year = (century_prefix + re.digit.repeat(2)).capture(:year)
  month = (under_ten | ten_to_twelve).capture(:month)
  day = (under_ten | ten_and_under_thirty | thirties).capture(:day)
         
  date = (year + delim + month + delim + day).all

Although it is more code, the individual pieces are smaller and
easier to independently verify.  As an additional bonus, the capture
groups can be retrieved by name:

      result = date.match("2009-01-23")
      result.data(:year)   # => "2009"
      result.data(:month)  # => "01"
      result.data(:day)    # => "23"

== Version: 0.0.3

== Usage:

  include Re

  number = re.any("0-9").all
  if number =~ string
    puts "Matches!"
  else
    puts "No Match"
  end

== Examples:

  re("a")                -- matches "a"
  re("a") + re("b")      -- matches "ab"
  re("a") | re("b")      -- matches "a" or "b"
  re("a").many           -- matches "", "a", "aaaaaa"
  re("a").one_or_more    -- matches "a", "aaaaaa", but not ""
  re("a").optional       -- matches "" or "a"
  re("a").all            -- matches "a", but not "xab"

See Re::Rexp for a complete list of expressions.

Using re without an argument allows access to a number of common
regular expression constants.  For example:

  re.space / re.spaces  -- matches " ", "\n" or "\t"
  re.digit / re.digits  -- matches a digit / sequence of digits

Also, re without arguments can also be used to construct character
classes:

  re.any                -- Matches any charactor
  re.any("abc")         -- Matches "a", "b", or "c"
  re.any("0-9")         -- Matches the digits 0 through 9
  re.any("A-Z", "a-z", "0-9", "_")
                        -- Matches alphanumeric or an underscore

See Re::ConstructionMethods for a complete list of common constants
and character class functions.

See Re.re, Re::Rexp, and Re::ConstructionMethods for details.

== License and Copyright:

Copyright 2009 by Jim Weirich (jim.weirich@gmail.com)

Re is provided under the MIT open source license (see MIT-LICENSE)

== Links:

* Documentation :: http://re-lib.rubyforge.org
* Source        :: http://github.com/jimweirich/re
* Bug Tracker   :: http://www.pivotaltracker.com/projects/47758
* Author        :: jim.weirich@gmail.com

